2019/11/21

https://www.dailymail.co.uk

Labour's hard-Left plan to bankrupt Britain: Jeremy Corbyn's £83BILLION manifesto spending splurge will be funded by hikes to death duties, 'super-taxes' for workers earning over £80,000 and a raid on 'big business'


Jeremy Corbyn was accused of taking a 'sledgehammer to the UK economy' today as he unveiled a 'colossal' £83billion manifesto splurge funded by hikes to death duties, 'supertaxes' on higher earners, and milking businesses.

The Labour leader vowed to overhaul the 'political establishment' as he set out his vision for a 'radical and ambitious' lurch to the hard Left - with the middle classes set to bear the brunt of the socialist assault. 

The party claims its bonanza on day-to-day spending - the running costs of services and benefits - amounts to £83billion a year. 

That is up from around £50billion in the 2017 manifesto, and critics say it is still a low estimate. It effectively means the government's tax take would need to increase by an eye-watering 10 per cent.

But that figure is dwarfed by the proposals for an escalation in capital outlay - adding to the country's long-term debt pile - which looks to total more than £500billion. 

Mr Corbyn insisted that his massive agenda can be financed by hiking taxes solely for the top 5 per cent of earners and a dramatic rise in corporation tax. An £11billion one-off windfall tax is being levied on oil firms.

However, the respected IFS think tank warned it was 'not credible' to claim the huge expansion of the state could be achieved purely on the backs of the rich.   

The costings for the manifesto make clear the party will raise billions of pounds by 'reversing' inheritance tax cuts brought in under the Tories. 

It does not spell out exactly what that means, but the threshold for couples paying 40 per cent death duties was raised from £660,000 to £1million in 2015.  

It means those who own property - particularly in the South East - are almost certain to be caught by the duty, and could face charges of hundreds of thousands of pounds. 

Marriage tax allowance, which is worth £250 a year and can only be claimed by people on less than £50,000, is also set to be scrapped. 

Those earning more than £80,000 will be subject to a new 'additional' tax rate of 45p in the pound - while incomes over £125,000 will be subject to a 50p rate.  

VAT will also be added to private school fees - although the party has backed off a policy of banning them altogether. 

IFS director Paul Johnson said the sums involved were 'colossal' and the idea they could be raised by taxing companies and the wealthy alone was 'not credible'.

'Take it from me, these are vast numbers,' he told ITV News. 

'Enormous, colossal in the context of anything we have seen in the last... ever.'

Mr Johnson dismissed the idea that those kind of sums could be raised from big companies and those earning more than £80,000.

'That is simply not credible,' he said. 'You simply cannot raise that kind of money in our tax system without affecting individuals.'

Mr Johnson said Labour was up front about wanting to 'transform' the way the country runs, but added: 'You need to pay for it. And it cannot be someone else who pays for it.'   

Mr Corbyn vowed to spend £75billion on new council houses, as well bringing swathes of the economy back into state ownership. 

Huge chunks of BT will be nationalised to provide free broadband for everyone, a move experts says would cost £100billion by itself. Labour insists it wants to introduce a four-day working week, as well as bolstering the powers of unions.  

In another controversial measure, the manifesto commits Labour to 'protecting' EU freedom of movement rights whether or not the country leaves the bloc. 

And again Mr Corbyn flatly refused to say whether he would back Leave or Remain in a referendum on a new deal with the EU that he has pledged to negotiate. In an interview with the Evening Standard, carried out last week, he was asked to choose between Leave and Remain, and replied: 'Both.'

The Tories said the blueprint showed Labour had 'no credible plan' for Brexit, would allow 'unlimited and uncontrolled immigration' and 'take a sledgehammer to the British economy'.

